well thank you very much for the invitation to come here and share the kinds of
things I know about burnout in Las Vegas this is so cool I never get to lecture
in a auditorium quite like this so what I would like to do is tell you a little
bit about what we've learned about job burnout and I've been studying it in
many many different occupations and when I was fighting to come here I said you
have any connection with IT and I said yeah right the occupational groups that
I've mostly worked with her in health care Human Services social activists and
I think that's probably also relevant for for some of you here but people who
have a passion for solving problems for social justice and get to the point of
saying no matter how hard we work we never get enough done and it's always this
elusive goal it's like is one of them said to me it's like being anorexic
you're never thin enough if you're an activist you are never working hard and
accomplishing enough so this has been part of my history as well but now we're
seeing in many other kinds of professions and actually about a little 15 20
years ago I was called by Sweden and some of my colleagues and I were asked
they were saying we're having this crisis in some of our workplace things
please come over and help us because we think it might be this thing called
burnout we're not really sure so we went over and it turned out that there's a
social insurance system for everybody who works in Sweden that if you are going
out on sick leave or some sort of disability you leave your job they pay for
your salary for up to a year and a half they put you in treatment for whatever
it is you need and after the year year-and-a-half you go back to your original
job you get what you had left and come in and what they were seeing was the
sharp increase in the number of people going out on sick leave from health care
and from IT and they were particularly concerned because when they looked at
the diagnosis it was severe clinical depression work-related only so that was
you know and certainly they're saying if that sounds like burnout that it's
oppression but only work-related and as we looked at colleagues and I looked at
the data and we were sort of saying well you know actually we think maybe
burnout happened upstream before this you now have a problem with severe
clinical depression and that's what you've got a treat but it was probably a
warning sign that people weren't paying attention to didn't know about earlier
on but it got a lot of attention in the press we were being interviewed our
photos are in the paper and every time I would go out on a break and walk
around you know like in the streets of Stockholm you know take a break there
would be people and you can see this whispering and pointing and after a while
somebody would come up and sort of tap me on the shoulder and say are you the
burnout woman from the United States yeah we saw you in the paper I said yes
yes and they said well I just wanted to tell you I'm one of those people who's
going out on leave that they're they're talking about I said okay and anything
else you want to share and they said I don't want to go back to that job ok so
    that was a really interesting kind of thing even though they were going to
    get this salary they were going to be away from work they were gonna get
    treatment it wasn't worth it was a price too high for them they did not
    want to go back to that job and that job is what we have learned from
    research is way more important for understanding what happens with burnout
    or engagement with work then individual characteristics like personality
    and where you came from and all this kind of thing so it's a theme that it
    will get back to a little bit later but that was my first go-around in
    terms of tech so what's happening now that we're seeing you know I've been
    studying this for several decades and so the workplace today is not really
    what it used to be several decades ago so we're not seeing people as doing
    as much full-time there is less and less concern investment in employees in
    various ways there's more destructive competition I cannot tell you how
    many people talk about the socially toxic workplace where you don't trust
    anybody because they're going to try and throw you under the and get rid of
    you as competition you don't dare ever say I'm tired I don't know the
    answer to this problem I wish I had some advice I'm feeling depressed
    you're showing your weak side you can't do that there are tactics that
    talent get rewarded for things but not everybody else people feel like
    they're getting shut out of opportunities and loss of a common good so
    there are things that are changing kind of how this is all working that I
    think may make sense as we look at a little bit later burnout by the way if
    anybody ever says I invented the word burnout for this stress response it's
    not true nobody invented it it's been around for a long long time and it's
    sort of as emerged as kind of language of the people I'm the daughter of an
    engineer who worked in the NASA space program at one point and I know we
    would hear burnout all the time rocket boosters burnout my favorite is ball
    bearings burnout and the reason is because it's it in an abrasive apartment
    without a key resource which is oil to make it function well and there is
    an analogy there to what we've learned about burnout in the workplace the
    other thing is that in the early days of Silicon Valley we were hearing and
    seeing a lot of the burnout shop ads people were trying to hire people
    saying we are the burnout shop and we don't want just type a people we want
    type A plus plus plus people and the burnout shop was really a start-up and
    it was a it was like a sprint you know it was a short-term kind of thing
    maybe a couple of years it was basically we own you you don't have no life
    when we call you come but and you're going to work and work until you have
    nothing left to give but then you'll have stock options or some other thing
    and you'll get a lot of money and you'll be fine so that was that was the
    trade-off that was the burnout shop interestingly what I think we're seeing
    more and more is that as a business model in a lot of occupations we're
    seeing it in healthcare we're seeing it in social services we're seeing it
    in education and it's now a marathon and the sprint model is still being
    used in terms of self-sacrifice you have to give up time you have to give
    up other things in your life in in order to do this and we don't always see
    metrics you know taking account of what some of the costs are of this the
    health problems physical exhaustion we've had some publicity recently about
    sleep Deborah deprivation and what that does to you not good disruptions of
    personal life loss of self-worth burnout depression anxiety and suicide
    sometimes we talk about suicidal ideation and so this is kind of the price
    that people are paying to work in these kinds of environments and we're
    seeing it as a more you know regular model and the assumption often is that
    people who burnout aren't so good and in fact I've talked to managers and
    CEOs who say burnouts wonderful and I say why do you think say that I mean
    they're you know all the costs in something it said because they burnout
    means they weren't so good they're not working well now and they're
    quitting saving me the job of having to fire them so very good it cleans
    the house and I don't have to spend much time on it in fact that's not the
    case the problem of unhealthy jobs and this is data that has all been
    pulled together and analyzed in a new book out by Jeff Pfeffer from the
    Stanford Business School and it's called dying for a paycheck we know that
    there are lots of very toxic and highly stressful job conditions we know
    that they pose a real danger to people's health and well-being so there's a
    lot of statistics on that but we're always hearing that that's you know we
    have to pay the price this is the way to be financially successful and so
    forth his analyses of all of the data that are looking at this is that they
    don't enhance productivity it doesn't necessarily help the bottom line so
    where's it's a lose/lose kind of proposition if you want to see the the
    book itself dying for a paycheck how modern management harms employee
    health and company performance and just came out and this is interesting
    because it echoes things that was happening in Japan not too many years ago
    where they're talking about Karoshi death from overwork heart attack
    strokes now they have a term Kairos jujitsu which means death overwork but
    suicide that is happening so we've got some real issues here in terms of
    this there's one image that I'm talking about today that I hope you
    remember it's this one and this is that we have found that the fit or the
    match or the balance or imbalance between a person and the job a person and
    the environment in which they're working is in critical for burnout in six
    areas they are not listed in order of importance they're listed in order of
    which one people think of first workload is the one that everybody thinks
    at first it must be they're working too hard they're stressed out on the
    imbalance between too many demands too few resources to get it done but
    there are five other areas that turn out to be just as important in some
    ways and so they can offer an alternative way to approach the problem one
    of these is control in other words how much autonomy you have in your work
    how much choice discretion to figure out how to do it the best way or
    innovate in some way reward people think of things like salary benefits
    perks etc we're finding in the research that social reward is also
    sometimes more important that other people notice that they appreciate what
    you do and let you know that you've done something that's really meaningful
    community refers to the workplace these are all the relationships you have
    at work with other colleagues your boss clients whoever and are those
    relationships functioning well are they supportive do you trust you have
    ways of working out disagreements and figuring out how to move forward work
    together well on teams etc fairness this turns out to be a real important
    one is whatever the policy is whatever the practices are here in this place
    are they fairly administered in terms of who gets the opportunity are there
    glass ceilings or discrimination or other things that block people from
    moving forward when they should have that that chance and finally sometimes
    this turns out to be one of the most important is values this is meaning
    this is why you know what is it why am I doing this why am I here what do I
    care about what what is important to me in terms of what I think is
    important for our society the contributions I make and so forth and so with
    burnout it's not just about being exhausted and working too hard and tired
    it's often that the spirit the passion the meaning is just getting beaten
    out of you as opposed to being allowed to sort of thrive and grow so these
    six areas offerors I'll show you later six different entry points into what
    could we do a little differently that might actually create a better
    healthier improved workplace to support the kind of things we want to
    achieve so if you look at it in mismatched terms demand overload a lack of
    control insufficient reward when I've talked with people about this often
    you know and ask them about what's a good day they can't tell me anything
    good and the best day is nothing bad happened you know it's kind of like
    mmm this is kind of a little depressing standard a breakdown of community
    people are talking a lot these days about socially toxic workplaces I love
    the work I think I'm good at it but I cannot stand being around these
    people and all the politicking in the and the stuff you know it's what you
    who you know rather than you know how well you do etc absence of fairness
    in value conflicts people being asked to do unethical kinds of things being
    asked to do things that they think are really wrong getting caught in binds
    so the more the mismatches the more likely we see a risk of burnout down
    the road a year later or too late or something like that it doesn't mean
    that all of them have to be in perfect shape not at all people can tolerate
    a lot of mismatch if there are some that are really really important and
    strong and working well so this is you know giving us a better picture now
    of how people function and why and what we can do okay burnout as a stress
    phenomenon it's a prolonged response to chronic situational stressors on
    the job and I want to emphasize chronic it's not a response to eight an
    acute crisis or an emergency or something it's the everyday stuff that
    begins to wear people down to the point where they're saying I can't do
    this anymore I don't want to be here anymore from the research we've
    identified three sort of overlapping but not completely the same in
    dimensions so we measure those one is the stress response which is known as
    exhaustion and this is like I can't do it anymore you know I've got you
    know I can't think straight I want to go home and I've still got you know
    more more going on cynicism is for me the heart of really burnout it's not
    just your working too hard but you're getting to the point where you're
    saying take this job and shove it Johnny paycheck anybody remember that
    country-western song and what happens here is that as you begin to get
    negative and hostile and cynical about the other people the place you know
    what's going on people start changing how they work rather than trying to
    do their very best they're trying to do the bare minimum what is the least
        I need to do and still have the job and get out of here and get a
        paycheck the socially toxic workplace this is where it comes in a lot
        and then there's a second one a third one which is negative
        self-evaluation you're feeling not great about yourself maybe I'm not
        really good at this maybe I've made a mistake I shouldn't be here
        people talk about the erosion of my soul that's an interesting phrase
        it comes up a lot that there's no future perhaps for me I'm stuck I
        can't you know what am I going to do in the future so there are these
        they come together in different patterns so the research measure that I
        developed many years ago the massive lack Burnout inventory was used to
        study what are causes and effects of this and what can we do about it
        people are often using it as a diagnostic tool now it measures the
        three dimensions but it doesn't ask agree disagree or yes/no it says
        how often do you feel like this and when people are at a higher risk of
        burnout they are reporting scores of five or six several times a week I
        feel like every day I am feeling it so it's like saying every day I'm
        feeling burned out I'm feeling like I can't deal with it anymore I
        don't want to deal with the people anymore we don't add all of these
        scores up into a single score because different patterns would yield
        the same total it doesn't make sense but we are using more
        sophisticated data now analysts analysis tools right now to give us
        profiles and patterns other people are trying to simplify and say it's
        only exhaustion or there's a cut-off score you're burned out you're not
        actually that's not a good way of talking about it what we've been
        finding so far is at least five one is burnout and you have three
        essentially negative scores high on exhaustion high on cynicism high on
        that professional in efficacy I'm not really good at that this I'm not
        feeling good about it second one is disengaged and here only one high
        negative score and that's on cynicism here's one people talk about a
        lot one high- score only on exhaustion and some people use that as a
        proxy for burnout if it's it's exhaustion burnout is exhaustion if
        they're high in exhaustion end of story that's all ineffective you have
        a high negative score on not feeling good about yourself and the fifth
        profile is you're not scoring high on any of those three you're
        actually looking pretty good and we're talking about these people is
        more engaged with work so here's a set of data that we just collected
        recently we another colleague of mine and this was in health care so
        these are all physicians they're being compared here against the
        baseline for physicians so more positive bars saying those six areas
        they're looking really pretty good whereas if you look at the burnout
        over here they are looking much worse than the norm than the average on
        that on all those areas there's a seventh one in their own
        administration which the physicians asks if they could answer those
        questions but the other six areas if you can look at this here this is
        the one that is the overextended profile there is one as high
        exhaustion and there is one issue and it's workload that's a different
        pattern entirely than people who are really experiencing full-blown
        burnout so all of this kind of things suggest I mean is cynicism one
        they disengaged looks more like this and here people are doing okay but
        not great they're not getting much on feedback social reward community
        so all of this suggests that if we can do more customized interventions
        depending on where people are in this we might do better than trying to
        say there's a one practice that will deal with burnout you know dealing
        with that one is a hard problem trying to do stuff earlier upstream is
        a better one so I used to be talking about burnout as being like a red
        flag that warns you that something is going wrong in the workplace let
        me change that a little bit and say it's more like the canary in the
        coal mine and if you understand that the canary in the cage goes down
        in the coal mine and if the canary is having trouble breathing and
        functioning its assigned to you that the workplace the mine is
        dangerous too many toxic fumes you better not send people down there so
        it's a warning sign and this is really what burnout is is is about in a
        sense it's a warning sign of a toxic work environment and what you
        should be doing is saying what is going on to cause such problems among
        people who work here what you don't want to do is try and make the bird
        better and tough and resilient and it can take you know if you can't
        stand the toxic fumes and the heat in the kitchen you shouldn't work
        here kind of thing so it's you know again it's it's a sign that it
        could get worse you don't want to go there because it's harder to treat
        people at that point so it's again a warning sign when I was in Sweden
        and we talked about this upstream thing with all the people there that
        was happening in the country one of the psychiatrist's that we were
        working with said ah reminds me of a fable and the fable is I may have
        heard this people are walking out in the forest and they're walking by
        a moving stream a river going over to a waterfall and all of a sudden
        they spot there's a little baby in the water that's being pushed along
        and is heading towards the waterfall in the water and so they're saying
        oh my god we've got to rescue this child run in you know to take the
        child out they get off and they look and hit oh there's another one and
        it's coming down the water race into the water to get rescue it and
        then more and then more and they're calling people come help help help
        we're going to rescue these children and suddenly a couple of the
        people leave and start running they say where are you going we've got
        to rescue these kids and they yell back where trying to find the
        pastors who are throwing them in so the thing is further upstream maybe
        where your problem is and not simply when it gets really difficult at
        this point so when I say fit between people in the job what do we mean
        here well we do with this a lot we fit people to the job by training
        them by educating them giving them experience here's what you have to
        do here's what you have to learn we also do a good job of helping them
            cope with stressors so if that heat is getting too much what do you
            do how do you get stronger healthier get enough sleep eat the right
                things meditate yoga there's tons of ideas out there as to what
                to do plus a lot of the coping mechanisms fall into the
                category of don't go to work well think about that they're
                saying the best way you can do this is not show up be absent
                take a vacation go home there's something to say and about the
                workplace really what's happening there these individual
                solutions helpful as they are and I'm a believer in health and
                you know well-being and and you know being resilient and so
                forth but they don't change the job they don't make it less
                toxic so actually what we need to be thinking about is more how
                do you fit the job to people and so what are the work
                    conditions that actually are causing like I mentioned
                    before an unhealthy workplace having negative effects on
                    people how could those be changed in some way well again
                    nothing new ergonomics human factors we do this all the
                    time but it's on the relationship between workers and their
                    physical environment so we sort of figure out how human
                    beings are built and made and how they sit and do different
                    things and how can you change the design one of my graduate
                    students for example who's worked on the cockpit design and
                    Airlines so you want to do it so you minimize the
                    possibility that someone will make a mistake the wrong
                    button pull the wrong lever so you adjust for how people
                    think and what they're more likely to notice and so forth
                    how do we apply that design model to the social and
                    psychological environment in other words how do we think
                    about workplaces that are actually helping people to become
                    more motivated to be more committed to be innovative and so
                    forth these are all psychological this is about how human
                    beings tick you know how we work how we function and could
                    we use that same kind of design principle not just for
                    physical but how do you make a workplace where people
                    thrive rather than getting beaten down where they provide a
                    better return on the investment you make on them and so
                    forth so even if you have bought the most beautiful plant
                    let's say and if you put it in a lousy pot with not much
                    soil no Sun in little water no matter how good that plant
                    was to start it's not going to thrive so you need to be
                    thinking about the setting and these other kinds of things
                    so what creates when if you start focusing on the social
                    psychological things it turns out different number five six
                    now seven core needs lots and lots of data on these that
                    say that when people feel that these needs get satisfied at
                    home at work you know wherever they will feel more
                    motivated they will feel more positive about whatever it is
                    they're doing so autonomy that you know the sense of can
                    some control and choice or what I do sense of belongingness
                    that I am part of a larger thing an important thing whether
                    it's a school or a team or a unit or whatever feeling
                    competent what is it that tells me that I am good at this
                    and I'm really feeling you know assure of what I'm doing
                    positive emotions we want to have things that make us feel
                    good periodically that we celebrate the laughs about that
                    we have a you know some some great things here fairness as
                    I mentioned before and meaning the values again and so what
                    the research is showing that if we you know these might be
                    the kinds of things we take into account as we're doing a
                    design a better design of workplaces that support people
                    okay so if we go back to those six paths that I mentioned
                    before the healthy workplace what might that look like in
                    positive turn what are the positive goals that we would
                    move towards so here are some that you know we've been
                    putting together with our work with healthcare systems so a
                    sustainable workload it's not about is that working hard or
                    not working long hours or not but is it something that it
                    can be sustained that there is time to recover get the rest
                    get that whatever before you go back in and do and do more
                    what what supports that choice and control some recognition
                    and reward a supportive work community this doesn't mean
                    you all agree but you have a way of working out conflicts
                    and disagreements and figure out how to me going forward
                    and that people know who to trust who they can go to for
                    advice mentorship etc fairness in terms of how we run
                    things respect social justice clear values and meaningful
                    work so just to give you a sense of it can be done this is
                    one of the first organizations that I worked with and it
                    was about a thousand people it was not healthcare it was a
                    variety of administrative services for a large corporation
                    and I'm showing you the mean scores when we started with
                    people on the six areas and what happened was they focused
                    on the fact that fairness was looking much more negative
                    than for the you know that occupation as a whole so they
                    decided to make changes think what is unfair I mean the CEO
                    was shocked what do you mean were unfair what are we doing
                    lots of things that turned out including a Distinguished
                    Service Award that people hated hated because even though
                    it paid extra money it was so unfair in her terms of who
                    got chosen to get the award you know it was the leader of
                    the team but not the whole team it was you had to be
                    nominated by your supervisor and if he or she couldn't be
                    bothered with doing this stuff you would never be eligible
                    etcetera so they went and changed this over all these
                    things over the year a year later here's what they looked
                    like they had turned the fairness issue around there was a
                    ripple effect and that's very common it's finding a place
                    to begin to make it a little bit better to build some
                    optimism to build some hope hey we changed that stupid
                    award now we got a good one what could we do next time and
                    feeding back this information to the people who generated
                    it I cannot say enough about communication with everybody
                    and getting sure you're getting good in put from all the
                    people that you're asking to involve and be a part of it
                    and they'd outdo this process every year since that time so
                    six strategic paths it turns out there are lots of
                    possibilities starting in any one of these six areas to
                    improve a better fit between people in the job they can be
                    small inexpensive and customizable in some cases they are
                    things that you don't have to ask a higher-up for
                    permission to do you don't have to get more money you don't
                    have to redesign things for the 20th first century and
                    there are ways in which people can take more control of the
                    work working together in a in a in a more socially positive
                    trusting kind of way that actually leads to fewer you know
                    reduction in burnout better engagement less absenteeism
                    less of the other negative outcomes and basically when you
                    start doing this kind of thing what we're seeing is a
                    healthier workplace former will thrive the workers and the
                    latter will sit seed final note I should say that the
                    burnout shop is we're seeing it today is not a viable it's
                    not a desirable future I don't think for our workplaces for
                    people there we have a new interdisciplinary Center at
                    Berkeley where I am now working with people I've never
                    worked with before like architects and people from
                    economics and so forth and trying to figure out a better
                    way of feeling out everybody has a piece of the work place
                    puzzle and how could we do something better than what we
                    have as we design those so Jeanne and John asked me what
                    kind of help are you looking for basically I want more good
                    examples of success stories or best practices within each
                    of those six areas I love to hear about these things
                    because people ask me all the time what would you recommend
                    I'd like to have the evidence of what would be best to
                    recommend I will go on the rooftops shout it out how can we
                    establish better partnerships between researchers like
                    myself and in practice what's actually happening how do we
                    come together bring the different knowledge mine more
                    generic your a more specific and come up with better
                    solutions trying them out and getting evidence do they work
                    or not do they need to be tweaked before they do it and be
                    able to use that evidence to spread to other places so that
                    in the future we're not going to see burnout as much of an
                    issue that is sort of poisoning the workplace but we're
                    going to see much more of that optimization that engagement
                    in which everyone is thriving and really doing their best
                    and enjoying being there so thank you so much [Applause]
